basics/lunar-lander/README.md, before:

# LunarLander-v2 DQN Experiments

Custom DQN implementation for the LunarLander-v2 environment with YAML-based configuration system for running controlled experiments.

## Project Structure

```
lunar-lander/
├── main.py                    # Training loop with config support
├── lunar_lander_dqn_agent.py  # DQN agent, replay buffer, network
├── plot_comparison.py         # Generate training comparison plots
├── configs/
│   ├── default.yaml           # Default config (warmup + train_freq=4)
│   ├── baseline.yaml          # Original DQN (no warmup, train_freq=1)
│   ├── balanced.yaml          # Middle ground (train_freq=2)
│   ├── warmup_only.yaml       # Isolate warmup effect (train_freq=1)
│   └── grad_steps_test.yaml   # Decorrelated sampling (4x4)
└── checkpoints/               # Saved model checkpoints
```

## Running Experiments

```bash
# Default config (warmup + reduced update frequency)
uv run python main.py

# Specific config
uv run python main.py --config configs/baseline.yaml
```

## Experiment: Training Frequency and Warmup Period

### Background

Standard DQN updates the network after every environment step. This experiment explores two modifications:

1. **`learning_starts`** (warmup period): Collect N experiences before any gradient updates. This allows the replay buffer to fill with diverse experiences before learning begins.

2. **`train_freq`**: Update the network every N environment steps instead of every step. This trades sample efficiency for training speed.

3. **`gradient_steps`**: Number of consecutive minibatch updates per update event. This decouples update volume from update frequency, allowing decorrelated sampling.

### Configurations Tested

| Config | learning_starts | train_freq | gradient_steps | Updates/1M steps |
|--------|-----------------|------------|----------------|------------------|
| baseline | 0 | 1 | 1 | ~1,000,000 |
| warmup_only | 20,000 | 1 | 1 | ~980,000 |
| balanced | 20,000 | 2 | 1 | ~490,000 |
| warmup (default) | 20,000 | 4 | 1 | ~245,000 |
| grad_steps_test | 20,000 | 4 | 4 | ~980,000 |

### Results

| Config | Wall Time | Best EVAL | Best Score | Final (20ep) | Final Score |
|--------|-----------|-----------|------------|--------------|-------------|
| baseline | 22.1m | 241.8 +/- 20.9 | **220.9** | 200.8 +/- 50.7 | 150.1 |
| warmup_only | 22.5m | 239.4 +/- 40.2 | 199.2 | 209.1 +/- 61.9 | 147.3 |
| grad_steps_test | 20.3m | 240.8 +/- 35.9 | 204.9 | 188.3 +/- 90.6 | 97.7 |
| balanced | 11.1m | 211.5 +/- 46.3 | 165.2 | 195.7 +/- 65.5 | 130.2 |
| warmup | 6.1m | 212.1 +/- 70.5 | 141.6 | 158.4 +/- 87.4 | 71.0 |

*Score = mean - std (used for ranking)*

### Key Findings

#### 1. Warmup period alone is neutral
Comparing baseline (no warmup) vs warmup_only (20k warmup, same train_freq=1):
- Nearly identical performance curves
- Both reach ~240 peak eval, ~200 final mean
- Warmup doesn't hurt, but doesn't significantly help either
- The replay buffer fills quickly enough during early random exploration

#### 2. Reduced train_freq hurts performance
Comparing configs with different train_freq values:
- baseline (train_freq=1): Best final score
- balanced (train_freq=2): 2x faster wall-clock, ~10% lower final score
- warmup (train_freq=4): 4x faster wall-clock, significantly worse final score

The update budget matters more than sample decorrelation for this environment.

#### 3. Gradient steps can compensate for reduced train_freq
The grad_steps_test config (train_freq=4, gradient_steps=4) achieves:
- Similar peak performance to baseline (~240)
- Same total update count (~980k updates)
- BUT higher final variance (std=90.6 vs std=50.7)

Decorrelated sampling helps reach peak performance but doesn't reduce final variance.

#### 4. Wall-clock vs sample efficiency tradeoff
| Config | Time | Quality |
|--------|------|---------|
| warmup | 6.1m | Poor |
| balanced | 11.1m | Acceptable |
| baseline | 22.1m | Best |

For quick iteration, balanced provides reasonable quality at half the time.

### Training Dynamics Observed

#### Q-value stability
All configs showed similar Q-value dynamics:
- Q-values stabilize around mean=25, max=60-80
- No Q-value explosion observed (max_grad_norm=10.0 helps)
- Target network hard updates every 10k steps work well

#### Epsilon decay
Using episode-based exponential decay (0.9995 per episode):
- Reaches minimum epsilon (~0.02) around episode 1500
- All configs have similar episode counts (~800-1100) at 1M steps

#### Gradient clipping
With max_grad_norm=10.0:
- Clip fraction typically 0-5%
- Gradient norms stabilize around 1-3 during training
- Higher clip fractions early in training when TD errors are large

### Environment Observations

#### Post-landing hovering behavior
The trained agent sometimes continues firing thrusters after landing. This happens because:
1. Episode only terminates when both legs contact AND body is "asleep" (no movement)
2. Continued thruster firing keeps the body "awake"
3. Agent hasn't learned that "do nothing" (action 0) is optimal after contact

This is a training artifact, not a bug. More training or reward shaping could address it.

### Future Experiments

1. **Prioritized Experience Replay**: Sample important transitions more often
2. **Dueling DQN**: Separate value and advantage streams
3. **Noisy Networks**: Replace epsilon-greedy with parametric noise
4. **Multi-seed evaluation**: Run each config 3-5 times for statistical significance
5. **Learning rate scheduling**: Anneal LR during training
6. **Larger networks**: Current [128, 128] may be underfitting
7. **Soft target updates (tau)**: Try tau=0.005 instead of hard updates

### Open Questions

1. Why does decorrelated sampling (grad_steps) increase final variance?
2. Would warmup help more with prioritized replay or larger batch sizes?
3. Is there an optimal train_freq for this environment given wall-clock constraints?
4. Does the post-landing hovering behavior affect evaluation scores significantly?

## Implementation Details

### Double DQN
Uses policy network to select actions, target network to evaluate Q-values:
```python
next_actions = self.policy_net(next_states).argmax(1, keepdim=True)
next_q = self.target_net(next_states).gather(1, next_actions).squeeze(1)
target_q = rewards + self.gamma * next_q * (1 - dones)
```

### Target Network Updates
Hard updates every 10,000 steps (original DQN paper approach):
```python
if total_steps % config["target_update_every"] == 0:
    agent.sync_target_network()
```

### Gradient Clipping
Global norm clipping to prevent exploding gradients:
```python
grad_norm, did_clip = clip_and_get_norm(
    self.policy_net.parameters(), self.max_grad_norm
)
```

### Logging
Eval every 25k steps with diagnostics:
```
>>> EVAL @ 500,000 steps: 215.3 +/- 45.2 | Updates: 492,500 (9,850/10k) | Q(mean/max): 24.8/67.3
```

## Visualization

Generate comparison plot:
```bash
uv run python plot_comparison.py
```

This creates `training_comparison.png` showing eval reward curves with error bands for all configs.

Commit message:

Add decorrelated clean-test configs (no warmup) and README notes
- decorrelated_4x4_nowarmup: compute-matched to baseline (~1M updates)
- decorrelated_4x8_nowarmup: stress test with 2x updates per step
- Both remove warmup to isolate update schedule effects

basics/lunar-lander/README.md, after:

# LunarLander-v2 DQN Experiments

Custom DQN implementation for the LunarLander-v2 environment with YAML-based configuration system for running controlled experiments.

## Project Structure

```
lunar-lander/
├── main.py                    # Training loop with config support
├── lunar_lander_dqn_agent.py  # DQN agent, replay buffer, network
├── plot_comparison.py         # Generate training comparison plots
├── configs/
│   ├── default.yaml           # Default config (warmup + train_freq=4)
│   ├── baseline.yaml          # Original DQN (no warmup, train_freq=1)
│   ├── balanced.yaml          # Middle ground (train_freq=2)
│   ├── warmup_only.yaml       # Isolate warmup effect (train_freq=1)
│   └── grad_steps_test.yaml   # Decorrelated sampling (4x4)
└── checkpoints/               # Saved model checkpoints
```

## Running Experiments

```bash
# Default config (warmup + reduced update frequency)
uv run python main.py

# Specific config
uv run python main.py --config configs/baseline.yaml
```

## Experiment: Training Frequency and Warmup Period

### Background

Standard DQN updates the network after every environment step. This experiment explores two modifications:

1. **`learning_starts`** (warmup period): Collect N experiences before any gradient updates. This allows the replay buffer to fill with diverse experiences before learning begins.

2. **`train_freq`**: Update the network every N environment steps instead of every step. This trades sample efficiency for training speed.

3. **`gradient_steps`**: Number of consecutive minibatch updates per update event. This decouples update volume from update frequency, allowing decorrelated sampling.

### Configurations Tested

| Config | learning_starts | train_freq | gradient_steps | Updates/1M steps |
|--------|-----------------|------------|----------------|------------------|
| baseline | 0 | 1 | 1 | ~1,000,000 |
| warmup_only | 20,000 | 1 | 1 | ~980,000 |
| balanced | 20,000 | 2 | 1 | ~490,000 |
| warmup (default) | 20,000 | 4 | 1 | ~245,000 |
| grad_steps_test | 20,000 | 4 | 4 | ~980,000 |
| decorrelated_4x4_nowarmup | 0 | 4 | 4 | ~1,000,000 |
| decorrelated_4x8_nowarmup | 0 | 4 | 8 | ~2,000,000 |

**Clean test configs** (`decorrelated_*_nowarmup`): These configs remove the warmup period to isolate the effect of the decorrelated update schedule. The 4x4 config is compute-matched to baseline (~1M updates), while 4x8 doubles the update budget.

### Results

| Config | Wall Time | Best EVAL | Best Score | Final (20ep) | Final Score |
|--------|-----------|-----------|------------|--------------|-------------|
| baseline | 22.1m | 241.8 +/- 20.9 | **220.9** | 200.8 +/- 50.7 | 150.1 |
| warmup_only | 22.5m | 239.4 +/- 40.2 | 199.2 | 209.1 +/- 61.9 | 147.3 |
| grad_steps_test | 20.3m | 240.8 +/- 35.9 | 204.9 | 188.3 +/- 90.6 | 97.7 |
| balanced | 11.1m | 211.5 +/- 46.3 | 165.2 | 195.7 +/- 65.5 | 130.2 |
| warmup | 6.1m | 212.1 +/- 70.5 | 141.6 | 158.4 +/- 87.4 | 71.0 |

*Score = mean - std (used for ranking)*

### Key Findings

#### 1. Warmup period alone is neutral
Comparing baseline (no warmup) vs warmup_only (20k warmup, same train_freq=1):
- Nearly identical performance curves
- Both reach ~240 peak eval, ~200 final mean
- Warmup doesn't hurt, but doesn't significantly help either
- The replay buffer fills quickly enough during early random exploration

#### 2. Reduced train_freq hurts performance
Comparing configs with different train_freq values:
- baseline (train_freq=1): Best final score
- balanced (train_freq=2): 2x faster wall-clock, ~10% lower final score
- warmup (train_freq=4): 4x faster wall-clock, significantly worse final score

The update budget matters more than sample decorrelation for this environment.

#### 3. Gradient steps can compensate for reduced train_freq
The grad_steps_test config (train_freq=4, gradient_steps=4) achieves:
- Similar peak performance to baseline (~240)
- Same total update count (~980k updates)
- BUT higher final variance (std=90.6 vs std=50.7)

Decorrelated sampling helps reach peak performance but doesn't reduce final variance.

#### 4. Wall-clock vs sample efficiency tradeoff
| Config | Time | Quality |
|--------|------|---------|
| warmup | 6.1m | Poor |
| balanced | 11.1m | Acceptable |
| baseline | 22.1m | Best |

For quick iteration, balanced provides reasonable quality at half the time.

### Training Dynamics Observed

#### Q-value stability
All configs showed similar Q-value dynamics:
- Q-values stabilize around mean=25, max=60-80
- No Q-value explosion observed (max_grad_norm=10.0 helps)
- Target network hard updates every 10k steps work well

#### Epsilon decay
Using episode-based exponential decay (0.9995 per episode):
- Reaches minimum epsilon (~0.02) around episode 1500
- All configs have similar episode counts (~800-1100) at 1M steps

#### Gradient clipping
With max_grad_norm=10.0:
- Clip fraction typically 0-5%
- Gradient norms stabilize around 1-3 during training
- Higher clip fractions early in training when TD errors are large

### Environment Observations

#### Post-landing hovering behavior
The trained agent sometimes continues firing thrusters after landing. This happens because:
1. Episode only terminates when both legs contact AND body is "asleep" (no movement)
2. Continued thruster firing keeps the body "awake"
3. Agent hasn't learned that "do nothing" (action 0) is optimal after contact

This is a training artifact, not a bug. More training or reward shaping could address it.

### Future Experiments

1. **Prioritized Experience Replay**: Sample important transitions more often
2. **Dueling DQN**: Separate value and advantage streams
3. **Noisy Networks**: Replace epsilon-greedy with parametric noise
4. **Multi-seed evaluation**: Run each config 3-5 times for statistical significance
5. **Learning rate scheduling**: Anneal LR during training
6. **Larger networks**: Current [128, 128] may be underfitting
7. **Soft target updates (tau)**: Try tau=0.005 instead of hard updates

### Open Questions

1. Why does decorrelated sampling (grad_steps) increase final variance?
2. Would warmup help more with prioritized replay or larger batch sizes?
3. Is there an optimal train_freq for this environment given wall-clock constraints?
4. Does the post-landing hovering behavior affect evaluation scores significantly?

## Implementation Details

### Double DQN
Uses policy network to select actions, target network to evaluate Q-values:
```python
next_actions = self.policy_net(next_states).argmax(1, keepdim=True)
next_q = self.target_net(next_states).gather(1, next_actions).squeeze(1)
target_q = rewards + self.gamma * next_q * (1 - dones)
```

### Target Network Updates
Hard updates every 10,000 steps (original DQN paper approach):
```python
if total_steps % config["target_update_every"] == 0:
    agent.sync_target_network()
```

### Gradient Clipping
Global norm clipping to prevent exploding gradients:
```python
grad_norm, did_clip = clip_and_get_norm(
    self.policy_net.parameters(), self.max_grad_norm
)
```

### Logging
Eval every 25k steps with diagnostics:
```
>>> EVAL @ 500,000 steps: 215.3 +/- 45.2 | Updates: 492,500 (9,850/10k) | Q(mean/max): 24.8/67.3
```

## Visualization

Generate comparison plot:
```bash
uv run python plot_comparison.py
```

This creates `training_comparison.png` showing eval reward curves with error bands for all configs.
